README.md, before:

# Oxidized Bio

> High-performance AI agent framework for biological and scientific research - Rust implementation

![Oxidized Bio](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-2021.0-orange.svg)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![Build](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen.svg)

**Oxidized Bio** is a high-performance Rust rewrite of the [BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents) framework. It provides state-of-the-art AI agent capabilities for biological and scientific research, achieving superior performance through Rust's memory safety and concurrency features.

## 🚀 Key Features

### Core Capabilities

- **Advanced Agent System** - Modular, independent agents for specialized research tasks
- **Multi-Provider LLM Support** - Unified interface for OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and OpenRouter
- **Vector Search with Knowledge Base** - Semantic document search with pgvector and Cohere reranking
- **Data Analysis Integration** - Support for Edison AI and BioAgents Data Analysis
- **Deep Research Mode** - Iterative hypothesis-driven research workflows
- **File Processing** - Multi-format support (PDF, Excel, CSV, Markdown, JSON, TXT, DOCX)
- **Payment Protocol Support** - x402 (Base/USDC) and b402 (BNB/USDT) for pay-per-request access
- **Real-time Notifications** - WebSocket support with Redis pub/sub for job progress
- **Job Queue System** - Redis-backed horizontal scaling with automatic retries

### Performance Advantages

Compared to the original TypeScript implementation, Oxidized Bio delivers:

- **2-3x Lower Latency** - Better async performance and no GVL pauses
- **30-50% Less Memory** - Efficient memory usage without garbage collection overhead
- **Higher Throughput** - Superior concurrency handling with Tokio
- **Zero-Cost Abstractions** - Compile-time guarantees without runtime overhead
- **Memory Safety** - No undefined behavior or memory corruption
- **Reduced CPU Usage** - More efficient execution and better cache locality

## 📋 Architecture

### Agent System

Oxidized Bio implements a sophisticated multi-agent architecture:

| Agent | Function |
|--------|----------|
| **File Upload** | Multi-format file parsing with AI-generated descriptions |
| **Planning** | Research plan generation based on context and objectives |
| **Literature** | Scientific literature search (OpenScholar, Edison, Knowledge Base) |
| **Analysis** | Data analysis on uploaded datasets (Edison, Bio) |
| **Hypothesis** | Testable hypothesis generation with citations |
| **Reflection** | Research progress tracking and insight extraction |
| **Reply** | User-facing response generation |

### Technology Stack

| Component | Technology |
|-----------|------------|
| **Web Framework** | Axum (Tower-based, async) |
| **Database** | PostgreSQL with SQLx (compile-time checked queries) |
| **Vector Search** | pgvector extension + Cohere reranker |
| **Job Queue** | Sidekiq (Redis-backed) |
| **Async Runtime** | Tokio |
| **LLM Providers** | async-openai, custom implementations |
| **Storage** | rust-s3 (S3-compatible) |
| **Authentication** | JWT (jsonwebtoken) |
| **Blockchain** | ethers-rs (Base, BNB Chain) |
| **Logging** | tracing ecosystem |

## 🛠️ Installation

### Prerequisites

- **Rust** 2021.0 or later
- **PostgreSQL** 14+ with pgvector extension
- **Redis** (optional, for job queue)
- **S3-compatible storage** (optional, for file uploads)

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio.git
cd oxidized-bio

# Start the TUI (single-user mode, no database required)
cargo run
```

The server will start on `http://localhost:3000` by default.

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file from `.env.example` and configure:

```bash
# Database
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:pass@localhost:5432/oxidized_bio

# Authentication
BIOAGENTS_SECRET=your-secure-secret-here
AUTH_MODE=none  # or 'jwt'

# LLM Providers
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-...
GOOGLE_API_KEY=...

# Storage
STORAGE_PROVIDER=s3
S3_BUCKET=your-bucket
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=...
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=...

# Payment (optional)
X402_ENABLED=false
X402_ENVIRONMENT=testnet
X402_PAYMENT_ADDRESS=...
```

### Database Setup (Not required for TUI)
The current build is **TUI-only** and does not require a database.  
If you need multi-user server mode, that would be a separate build.

## 📖 API Documentation

### Core Endpoints

#### Chat Endpoint
```http
POST /api/chat
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "message": "What is the effect of rapamycin on longevity?",
  "conversation_id": "optional-uuid"
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "message_id": "uuid",
  "content": "Research findings...",
  "conversation_id": "uuid",
  "response_time": 1234
}
```

#### Deep Research Endpoint
```http
POST /api/deep-research/start
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "message": "Investigate rapamycin's effects on cellular aging",
  "conversation_id": "optional-uuid",
  "research_mode": "semi-autonomous"
}
```

#### Status Check
```http
GET /api/health
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "status": "ok",
  "timestamp": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
  "database": "connected",
  "redis": "connected"
}
```

#### File Upload
```http
POST /api/files
Content-Type: multipart/form-data

file: [binary data]
```

#### TUI (Recommended for single-user workflows)
Run the TUI and use slash commands to load local files and analyze without a database:
```
oxidized-bio
```

Slash commands:
```
/help
/upload /path/to/data.csv
/list
/use <dataset_id>
/analyze [dataset_id] [target=age] [group=cell_type] [box=marker_1] [cov=batch,sex]
```

#### Data Analysis
```http
POST /api/analysis
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "dataset_id": "uuid",
  "target_column": "age",
  "group_column": "cell_type",
  "covariates": ["batch", "sex"],
  "boxplot_column": "marker_1",
  "max_columns": 50,
  "max_groups": 20
}
```

**Analysis output includes:**
- Descriptive statistics
- Linear regression results
- Novelty scores
- Biomarker candidates ranked by correlation with target
- A manuscript-style scientific summary with a project ID
- Artifact files (CSV + PNG plots)

### Payment-Gated Endpoints (x402/b402)

```http
POST /api/x402/chat
X-Payment: [payment-proof]

{
  "message": "Question requiring payment"
}
```

## 🔧 Development

### Project Structure

```
oxidized-bio/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Application entry point
│   ├── config.rs         # Configuration management
│   ├── models.rs         # Core data structures
│   ├── types.rs          # Type definitions and errors
│   ├── db/              # Database layer
│   ├── agents/          # Agent implementations
│   ├── llm/             # LLM abstraction layer
│   ├── embeddings/       # Vector search
│   ├── storage/          # S3 storage
│   ├── routes/          # API handlers
│   ├── middleware/      # Request/response middleware
│   ├── queue/           # Job queue
│   ├── payment/         # Payment protocols
│   └── utils/           # Utilities
├── migrations/           # SQLx migrations
├── docs/                # Knowledge base
├── Cargo.toml
└── README.md
```

### Building

```bash
# Debug build
cargo build

# Release build (optimized)
cargo build --release

# Run tests
cargo test

# Run with logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
cargo fmt

# Lint code
cargo clippy

# Check compilation without building
cargo check
```

## 🚀 Deployment

### Docker

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t oxidized-bio .

# Run container
docker run -p 3000:3000 \
  -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://... \
  -e BIOAGENTS_SECRET=... \
  oxidized-bio
```

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  oxidized-bio:
    build: .
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    environment:
      - DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres:password@db:5432/oxidized_bio
      - REDIS_URL=redis://redis:6379
    depends_on:
      - db
      - redis

  db:
    image: pgvector/pgvector:pg16
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_DB=oxidized_bio
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password

  redis:
    image: redis:7-alpine
```

## 📊 Performance

Benchmark comparisons (simulated, based on Rust advantages):

| Metric | TypeScript (Original) | Rust (Oxidized Bio) | Improvement |
|--------|---------------------|----------------------|-------------|
| Cold Start | 500ms | 200ms | 2.5x |
| Memory Usage | 200MB | 100MB | 2x |
| Request Latency (p50) | 100ms | 40ms | 2.5x |
| Request Latency (p99) | 500ms | 150ms | 3.3x |
| Throughput | 100 req/s | 300 req/s | 3x |

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

### Development Workflow

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests (`cargo test`)
5. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Original [BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents) framework by bio-xyz
- The Rust community for excellent async/await libraries
- All contributors who helped improve Oxidized Bio

## 🔗 Links

- [Documentation](docs/)
- [API Reference](docs/API.md)
- [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Changelog](CHANGELOG.md)
- [Original BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents)

## 📧 Contact

- Issues: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio/issues)
- Discussions: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio/discussions)

---

**Built with ❤️ in Rust for performance, safety, and reliability.**

Commit message:

Implement guided biomarker workflow in TUI
- Added new slash commands for workflow management: `/status`, `/next`, and `/feedback`.
- Introduced a `WorkflowStage` enum to track the current stage of the guided workflow.
- Enhanced the application state to manage workflow stages and draft versions.
- Updated README with detailed instructions for the new guided biomarker workflow process.
- Improved command handling to facilitate user feedback and draft generation.

README.md, after:

# Oxidized Bio

> High-performance AI agent framework for biological and scientific research - Rust implementation

![Oxidized Bio](https://img.shields.io/badge/rust-2021.0-orange.svg)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![Build](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen.svg)

**Oxidized Bio** is a high-performance Rust rewrite of the [BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents) framework. It provides state-of-the-art AI agent capabilities for biological and scientific research, achieving superior performance through Rust's memory safety and concurrency features.

## 🚀 Key Features

### Core Capabilities

- **Advanced Agent System** - Modular, independent agents for specialized research tasks
- **Multi-Provider LLM Support** - Unified interface for OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, and OpenRouter
- **Vector Search with Knowledge Base** - Semantic document search with pgvector and Cohere reranking
- **Data Analysis Integration** - Support for Edison AI and BioAgents Data Analysis
- **Deep Research Mode** - Iterative hypothesis-driven research workflows
- **File Processing** - Multi-format support (PDF, Excel, CSV, Markdown, JSON, TXT, DOCX)
- **Payment Protocol Support** - x402 (Base/USDC) and b402 (BNB/USDT) for pay-per-request access
- **Real-time Notifications** - WebSocket support with Redis pub/sub for job progress
- **Job Queue System** - Redis-backed horizontal scaling with automatic retries

### Performance Advantages

Compared to the original TypeScript implementation, Oxidized Bio delivers:

- **2-3x Lower Latency** - Better async performance and no GVL pauses
- **30-50% Less Memory** - Efficient memory usage without garbage collection overhead
- **Higher Throughput** - Superior concurrency handling with Tokio
- **Zero-Cost Abstractions** - Compile-time guarantees without runtime overhead
- **Memory Safety** - No undefined behavior or memory corruption
- **Reduced CPU Usage** - More efficient execution and better cache locality

## 📋 Architecture

### Agent System

Oxidized Bio implements a sophisticated multi-agent architecture:

| Agent | Function |
|--------|----------|
| **File Upload** | Multi-format file parsing with AI-generated descriptions |
| **Planning** | Research plan generation based on context and objectives |
| **Literature** | Scientific literature search (OpenScholar, Edison, Knowledge Base) |
| **Analysis** | Data analysis on uploaded datasets (Edison, Bio) |
| **Hypothesis** | Testable hypothesis generation with citations |
| **Reflection** | Research progress tracking and insight extraction |
| **Reply** | User-facing response generation |

### Technology Stack

| Component | Technology |
|-----------|------------|
| **Web Framework** | Axum (Tower-based, async) |
| **Database** | PostgreSQL with SQLx (compile-time checked queries) |
| **Vector Search** | pgvector extension + Cohere reranker |
| **Job Queue** | Sidekiq (Redis-backed) |
| **Async Runtime** | Tokio |
| **LLM Providers** | async-openai, custom implementations |
| **Storage** | rust-s3 (S3-compatible) |
| **Authentication** | JWT (jsonwebtoken) |
| **Blockchain** | ethers-rs (Base, BNB Chain) |
| **Logging** | tracing ecosystem |

## 🛠️ Installation

### Prerequisites

- **Rust** 2021.0 or later
- **PostgreSQL** 14+ with pgvector extension
- **Redis** (optional, for job queue)
- **S3-compatible storage** (optional, for file uploads)

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio.git
cd oxidized-bio

# Start the TUI (single-user mode, no database required)
cargo run
```

The server will start on `http://localhost:3000` by default.

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file from `.env.example` and configure:

```bash
# Database
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:pass@localhost:5432/oxidized_bio

# Authentication
BIOAGENTS_SECRET=your-secure-secret-here
AUTH_MODE=none  # or 'jwt'

# LLM Providers
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-...
GOOGLE_API_KEY=...

# Storage
STORAGE_PROVIDER=s3
S3_BUCKET=your-bucket
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=...
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=...

# Payment (optional)
X402_ENABLED=false
X402_ENVIRONMENT=testnet
X402_PAYMENT_ADDRESS=...
```

### Database Setup (Not required for TUI)
The current build is **TUI-only** and does not require a database.  
If you need multi-user server mode, that would be a separate build.

## 📖 API Documentation

### Core Endpoints

#### Chat Endpoint
```http
POST /api/chat
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "message": "What is the effect of rapamycin on longevity?",
  "conversation_id": "optional-uuid"
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "message_id": "uuid",
  "content": "Research findings...",
  "conversation_id": "uuid",
  "response_time": 1234
}
```

#### Deep Research Endpoint
```http
POST /api/deep-research/start
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "message": "Investigate rapamycin's effects on cellular aging",
  "conversation_id": "optional-uuid",
  "research_mode": "semi-autonomous"
}
```

#### Status Check
```http
GET /api/health
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "status": "ok",
  "timestamp": "2024-01-01T00:00:00Z",
  "database": "connected",
  "redis": "connected"
}
```

#### File Upload
```http
POST /api/files
Content-Type: multipart/form-data

file: [binary data]
```

#### TUI (Recommended for single-user workflows)
Run the TUI and use slash commands to load local files and analyze without a database:
```
oxidized-bio
```

Slash commands:
```
/help
/upload /path/to/data.csv
/list
/use <dataset_id>
/analyze [dataset_id] [target=age] [group=cell_type] [box=marker_1] [cov=batch,sex]
/status
/next
/feedback <text>
/latex
```

### Guided Biomarker Workflow (TUI)
1) Upload dataset (`/upload`) – must include **Ensembl ID** and **Age** columns.  
2) `/next` to generate the research plan.  
3) `/next` to run literature review.  
4) `/next` to generate findings + visualizations.  
5) `/next` to produce Draft 1.  
6) Provide feedback with `/feedback <text>` and `/next` to generate Draft 2.  
7) Provide feedback again and `/next` for Draft 3.  
8) `/latex` to export LaTeX. You can keep iterating with `/feedback` + `/next`.

#### Data Analysis
```http
POST /api/analysis
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "dataset_id": "uuid",
  "target_column": "age",
  "group_column": "cell_type",
  "covariates": ["batch", "sex"],
  "boxplot_column": "marker_1",
  "max_columns": 50,
  "max_groups": 20
}
```

**Analysis output includes:**
- Descriptive statistics
- Linear regression results
- Novelty scores
- Biomarker candidates ranked by correlation with target
- A manuscript-style scientific summary with a project ID
- Artifact files (CSV + PNG plots)

### Payment-Gated Endpoints (x402/b402)

```http
POST /api/x402/chat
X-Payment: [payment-proof]

{
  "message": "Question requiring payment"
}
```

## 🔧 Development

### Project Structure

```
oxidized-bio/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Application entry point
│   ├── config.rs         # Configuration management
│   ├── models.rs         # Core data structures
│   ├── types.rs          # Type definitions and errors
│   ├── db/              # Database layer
│   ├── agents/          # Agent implementations
│   ├── llm/             # LLM abstraction layer
│   ├── embeddings/       # Vector search
│   ├── storage/          # S3 storage
│   ├── routes/          # API handlers
│   ├── middleware/      # Request/response middleware
│   ├── queue/           # Job queue
│   ├── payment/         # Payment protocols
│   └── utils/           # Utilities
├── migrations/           # SQLx migrations
├── docs/                # Knowledge base
├── Cargo.toml
└── README.md
```

### Building

```bash
# Debug build
cargo build

# Release build (optimized)
cargo build --release

# Run tests
cargo test

# Run with logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
cargo fmt

# Lint code
cargo clippy

# Check compilation without building
cargo check
```

## 🚀 Deployment

### Docker

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t oxidized-bio .

# Run container
docker run -p 3000:3000 \
  -e DATABASE_URL=postgresql://... \
  -e BIOAGENTS_SECRET=... \
  oxidized-bio
```

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  oxidized-bio:
    build: .
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    environment:
      - DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres:password@db:5432/oxidized_bio
      - REDIS_URL=redis://redis:6379
    depends_on:
      - db
      - redis

  db:
    image: pgvector/pgvector:pg16
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_DB=oxidized_bio
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password

  redis:
    image: redis:7-alpine
```

## 📊 Performance

Benchmark comparisons (simulated, based on Rust advantages):

| Metric | TypeScript (Original) | Rust (Oxidized Bio) | Improvement |
|--------|---------------------|----------------------|-------------|
| Cold Start | 500ms | 200ms | 2.5x |
| Memory Usage | 200MB | 100MB | 2x |
| Request Latency (p50) | 100ms | 40ms | 2.5x |
| Request Latency (p99) | 500ms | 150ms | 3.3x |
| Throughput | 100 req/s | 300 req/s | 3x |

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

### Development Workflow

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests (`cargo test`)
5. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Original [BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents) framework by bio-xyz
- The Rust community for excellent async/await libraries
- All contributors who helped improve Oxidized Bio

## 🔗 Links

- [Documentation](docs/)
- [API Reference](docs/API.md)
- [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- [Changelog](CHANGELOG.md)
- [Original BioAgents](https://github.com/bio-xyz/BioAgents)

## 📧 Contact

- Issues: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio/issues)
- Discussions: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/your-username/oxidized-bio/discussions)

---

**Built with ❤️ in Rust for performance, safety, and reliability.**
